# Project: Data Lake

## Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I am tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from the data lake hosted on AWS S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data, in parquet format, back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Project Datasets

- Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
- Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

[](https://video.udacity-data.com/topher/2019/February/5c6c3f0a_log-data/log-data.png)

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, a star schema is created to be optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table

1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

2. users - users in the app
    - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. songs - songs in music database
    - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
4. artists - artists in music database
    - artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
5. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
    
## Getting Started

The project template includes three files:

    - etl.py reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3
    - dl.cfgcontains AWS credentials
    - README.md provides descriptions about this project

- It's recommended to run this project in Amazon EMR since this is big data. Set the `output_data` variable in `etl.py` `main` function to a valid path of a S3 bucket.

- To run this project in local mode, set the `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` in `dl.py` and the `output_data` variable in `etl.py` `main` function to a valid path of a S3 bucket or local disk.

- Upon setting up the right paths mentioned above, execute `python etl.py` to run the project.

## ETL Pipeline

1. Extract songs and logs data from S3
2. Transform and create a set of a fact table and 4 dimention tables
3. Load the fact and dimention tables back to S3