# Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring me on the project. My role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. I'll be able to test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to me by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare my results with their expected results.

## Project Datasets

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

[](https://video.udacity-data.com/topher/2019/February/5c6c3f0a_log-data/log-data.png)

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, a star schema is created to be optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table

1. **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
    - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

2. **users** - users in the app
    - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. **songs** - songs in music database
    - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
4. **artists** - artists in music database
    - artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
5. **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
    
## ETL Pipeline

1. Create a set of 1 fact table and 4 dimention tables
2. Extract songs and logs data from song and log dataset path, respectively
3. Transform the above mentioned datasets
4. Load transformed data into the fact and dimention tables

## Getting Started

1. Setup the database connection config variable `conn` in function `create_database` in `create_tables.py` file

2. Execute commmand `python create_tables.py`

3. Setup the database connection config variable `conn` in function `main` in `etl.py` file

4. Execute command `python etl.py`

5. To confirm the `etl` processes were successfully executed
    - Setup the database connection config in the second ceel `%sql postgresql://student:student@127.0.0.1/sparkifydb` in `test.ipynb` file
    - Execute command `jupyter notebook test.ipynb`